---
layout: post
title:  Modify BitOr operator in Python using ast
date:   2022-06-07 14:29:00 +0100
description: Python ast
tags: Python
---

Python scripts are parsed into a AST before compiling to bytecode and execute. Modifying the AST can change how Python scripts behave in runtime, without touching the code itself. The official module for modifying the AST is [`ast`][python-ast].

However, it is not easy to modify the AST and the number of available tutorials is low. I will note down necessary steps while learning it. 

My first example is modifying the BitOr operator `|` in Python. It is rarely used in my daily Python scripts and I think it may help to use it as a pipeline operator. In processing seismological data, it is common to have a data passing through a series of operations. Pipeline is naturally fit here.

I made a minimal example to work on, with two files, `add.py` and `test.py`. `add.py` defines a function `add` and `test.py` calls the function `add` using a 'pipeline syntax'.

{% highlight python %}
# add.py
def add(x, y):
    return x + y
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight python %}
# test.py
import add
x, y = 1, 2
res = (x, y) | add.add
print('res = ', res)
{% endhighlight %}

To run the `test.py`, I wrote another script `main.py` which reads in test.py, parses, modifies the BitOr operator and run the modified code.

{% highlight python %}
# main.py
import ast

with open('test.py', 'r') as f:
    data = f.read()

tree = ast.parse(data)

class ParsePipe(ast.NodeTransformer):

    def visit_BinOp(self, node):
        if isinstance(node.op, ast.BitOr):
            new_node = ast.Call(func=node.right,
                    args=[node.left.elts[0],
                        node.left.elts[1]],
                    keywords=[])
            ast.copy_location(new_node, node)
            ast.fix_missing_locations(new_node)
            return new_node
        return node

exec(compile(ParsePipe().visit(tree), 'test.py', 'exec'))
{% endhighlight %}

Running `python main.py` produces `res = 3`. What the `main.py` does is 
- Parse. `ast.parse` parses the Python code to a AST tree.
- Modify. The class `ParsePipe` traverses every `BinOp` node in the AST and replace it by a function call if the node is a `BitOr` node. The function call uses the right side of the `BitOr` as the function and the left side as the arguments. 
- Compile and Run. Compile the modified AST with the original script name and the argument `exec`. Run using the `exec` function

## Further Reading
- [Exploring Python Code Objects][code-objects]
- [Green Tree Snakes - the missing Python AST docs][greentreesnakes]

[python-ast]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/ast.html
[code-objects]: https://late.am/post/2012/03/26/exploring-python-code-objects.html
[greentreesnakes]: https://greentreesnakes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
